

Our profit margins are under real pressure from many factors, including the higher costs of developing new reserves, less oil found per foot drilled, rising inflationary costs of doing business, oversupply of crude, crude oil price volatility, competition for oil company investments, competition for acreage/concessions, competition for funds, and overall business risk and uncertainty.

Highly capital-intensive, and risky industries.

Te planning function is classifed into long-term strategic plans and short-term tactical plans. Strategic plans provide a broader view of activities focusing on objectives and goals over a longer time period, say, from 5 to 10 years. Te tactical plans provide a detailed view of the activities focusing on the means to attain goals.

Economics is a social science that studies the allocation of scarce resources among competing ends.

Macroeconomics and microeconomics. Macroeconomics is the branch of economics dealing with the aggregate level of output and employment.

Macroeconomics is the branch of economics dealing with the aggregate level of output and employment, national income, and the general price levels and the factors inﬂuencing it.

In normal petroleum operations, the value of b ranges between 0 and 1.0, with b = 0 being an exponential decline and b = 1.0 being a harmonic decline (special case of hyperbolic decline). However, it is found that in fractured tight (low-permeability) formations, exponents in excess of 1.0 may be calculated. Care should be exercised in these cases, as a high value for b will result in an unrealistically low decline rate late in the well life. Te following equations are used to interpret hyperbolic decline curves. Several methods are available to evaluate the hyperbolic exponent b. Tree of the most commonly used methods are (1) French curve method, (2) shifing the curve on log-log graph paper, and (3) type-curve ftting method. Only the frst two methods are presented here. Other methods are described in technical journals such as the Journal of Petroleum Technology and the Oil & Gas Journal. 4–8 French curve method: A French curve is a template made in the shape of a hyperbolic curve that is used to draw smooth curve shapes. Tis is a preferred method because it is easy to use, gives comparable results, and is not time consuming. Te following steps should be followed: 1. Plot the monthly production data on a semi-logarithmic graph paper. 2. With the help of a French curve, draw a best-ft curve through the plotted data. 3. Select a point qi on this curve and draw a line tangent to the curve at this point. 4. Compute the eﬀective decline rate, d, per year and compute a i = –ln(1– d). 5. Select another point qt at some point t from the initial rate qi, and try diﬀerent values of b in equation (3.11) until a value of b is found that gives a qt value close to the one selected. Tis trial-and-error calculation can be easily done with the help of a programmable calculator. (3.9) (3.10).

Curves. Several methods are available to evaluate the hyperbolic exponent b. Tree of the most commonly used methods are (1) French curve method, (2) shifing the curve on log-log graph paper, and (3) type-curve ftting method. Only the frst two methods are presented here. Other methods are described in technical journals such as the Journal of Petroleum Technology and the Oil & Gas Journal. 4–8 French curve method: A French curve is a template made in the shape of a hyperbolic curve that is used to draw smooth curve shapes. Tis is a preferred method because it is easy to use, gives comparable results, and is not time consuming. Te following steps should be followed: 1. Plot the monthly production data on a semi-logarithmic graph paper. 2. With the help of a French curve, draw a best-ft curve through the plotted data. 3. Select a point qi on this curve and draw a line tangent to the curve at this point. 4. Compute the eﬀective decline rate, d, per year and compute a i = –ln(1– d). 5. Select another point qt at some point t from the initial rate qi, and try diﬀerent values of b in equation (3.11) until a value of b is found that gives a qt value close to the one selected. Tis trial-and-error calculation can be easily done with the help of a programmable calculator. (3.9) (3.10).

Payback period Te payback period, also referred to as the breakeven point, is defned as the expected number of years required for recovering the original investment. At this point, the cash receipts exactly equal the cash disbursements. Tis yardstick is used along with at least one other measure of proftability.

Payback period Te payback period, also referred to as the breakeven point, is defned as the expected number of years required for recovering the original investment. At this point, the cash receipts exactly equal the cash disbursements. Tis yardstick is used along with at least one other measure of proftability, since it does not provide a meaningful decision criterion by itself.

Net present value (NPV) Te net present value (NPV), also referred to as the present value of cash surplus or present worth, is obtained by subtracting the present value of periodic cash outﬂows from the present value of periodic cash inﬂows. Te present value is calculated using the weighted average cost of capital of the investor, also referred to as the discount rate or minimum acceptable rate of return. Te discount rate should reﬂect the value of the alternative use of funds. What is an alternative use of funds? Money has value regardless of how it is utilized. If it is kept in a bank savings account, it earns interest; if it is kept in a mattress, it loses real value with time because of the missed opportunity of earning interest. For example, if $100,000 invested in a bank earning 5% interest is withdrawn for investing it in another project, the 5% becomes the cost of capital or the opportunity cost of the $100,000 that is forgone by investing it in another project. Te bank account is the alternative use of funds. Terefore, when evaluating the project it must generate at least 5% to break even with the returns from the bank account. Te risk factor also comes into play (if return from the project is riskier than the return on the bank account, then some risk premium more than the 5% return is desired). When the NPV of an investment at a certain discount rate is positive, it pays for the cost of fnancing the investment or the cost of the alternative use of funds. Te investment generates revenue that is equal to the positive present value. It also implies the rate of return on the investment is at least equal to the discount rate. Conversely, a negative NPV indicates the investment is not generating earnings equivalent to those expected from the alternative use of funds, thus causing opportunity loss. Te net present value method of evaluating the desirability of investments is mathematically represented by the following equation. (6.3) OR (6.3a).

Investor, also referred to as the discount rate or minimum acceptable rate of return. Te discount rate should reﬂect the value of the alternative use of funds. What is an alternative use of funds? Money has value regardless of how it is utilized. If it is kept in a bank savings account, it earns interest; if it is kept in a mattress, it loses real value with time because of the missed opportunity of earning interest. For example, if $100,000 invested in a bank earning 5% interest is withdrawn for investing it in another project, the 5% becomes the cost of capital or the opportunity cost of the $100,000 that is forgone by investing it in another project. Te bank account is the alternative use of funds. Terefore, when evaluating the project it must generate at least 5% to break even with the returns from the bank account. Te risk factor also comes into play (if return from the project is riskier than the return on the bank account, then some risk premium more than the 5% return is desired). When the NPV of an investment at a certain discount rate is positive, it pays for the cost of fnancing the investment or the cost of the alternative use of funds. Te investment generates revenue that is equal to the positive present value. It also implies the rate of return on the investment is at least equal to the discount rate. Conversely, a negative NPV indicates the investment is not generating earnings equivalent to those expected from the alternative use of funds, thus causing opportunity loss. Te net present value method of evaluating the desirability of investments is mathematically represented by the following equation. (6.3) OR (6.3a).

Present value (NPV) Te net present value (NPV), also referred to as the present value of cash surplus or present worth, is obtained by subtracting the present value of periodic cash outﬂows from the present value of periodic cash inﬂows. Te present value is calculated using the weighted average cost of capital of the investor, also referred to as the discount rate or minimum acceptable rate of return. Te discount rate should reﬂect the value of the alternative use of funds. What is an alternative use of funds? Money has value regardless of how it is utilized. If it is kept in a bank savings account, it earns interest; if it is kept in a mattress, it loses real value with time because of the missed opportunity of earning interest. For example, if $100,000 invested in a bank earning 5% interest is withdrawn for investing it in another project, the 5% becomes the cost of capital or the opportunity cost of the $100,000 that is forgone by investing it in another project. Te bank account is the alternative use of funds. Terefore, when evaluating the project it must generate at least 5% to break even with the returns from the bank account. Te risk factor also comes into play (if return from the project is riskier than the return on the bank account, then some risk premium more than the 5% return is desired). When the NPV of an investment at a certain discount rate is positive, it pays for the cost of fnancing the investment or the cost of the alternative use of funds. Te investment generates revenue that is equal to the positive present value. It also implies the rate of return on the investment is at least equal to the discount rate. Conversely, a negative NPV indicates the investment is not generating earnings equivalent to those expected from the alternative use of funds, thus causing opportunity loss. Te net present value method of evaluating the desirability of investments is mathematically represented by the following equation. (6.3) OR (6.3a).

Internal rate of return (IRR) • Proftability index • Unit technical cost or long-run marginal cost • Cost beneft ratio In chapter 7, these parameters are used in arriving at economic decisions in a variety of investment situations. Note that all subsequent techniques for.

Payback period • Internal rate of return (IRR) • Proftability index • Unit technical cost or long-run marginal cost • Cost beneft ratio In chapter 7, these parameters are used in arriving at economic decisions in a variety of investment situations. Note that all subsequent techniques for.

1. It must be suitable for comparing and ranking the proftability of available investment alternatives. 2. It should account for the time value of money. 3. It should provide a means for telling whether proftability exceeds some minimum cut-oﬀ (threshold) requirement of the organization. 4. It should be able to include probability estimates to generate expected values. 5. If possible it should reﬂect other factors such as corporate goals, decision makers’ risk preferences, and corporate asset position. 6. It should reﬂect the size of the initial investment; otherwise, there might be an inappropriate bias toward small investments. Such a situation may strain the company resources essential for the implementation of the available projects. Te.

Net present value (NPV) • Payback period • Internal rate of return (IRR) • Proftability index • Unit technical cost or long-run marginal cost • Cost beneft ratio In chapter 7, these parameters are used in arriving at economic decisions in a variety of investment situations. Note that all subsequent techniques for.

Te defnition of PI implies that projects with the largest PI values generate the largest cumulative NPV that can be accumulated from the available present worth investment dollars (i.e., the higher the PI, the better the investment). A variation to the defnition of the proftability index is the present value ratio (PVR), present value index (PVI), discounted proftto-investment ratio (DPIR), or investment efciency. Te PVR is the ratio of the NPV to the present value of capital investment rather than the ratio of the PV of future operating cash ﬂows to the PV of capital investment. Mathematically, this relationship is represented by the following equation. (6.8).

Te PI generates a number greater than one (1.0) for investments with a positive NPV and a number less than one for investments with a negative NPV. Te decision rules for use of the PI are.


