

People outgrow myth and mythology when myth and mythology fail to respond to their cultural needs.

The difference between God and god is that the latter fears death and jealously guards Amrita, the nectar of immortality. God has no such fear. God never dies, for God was never born. Every time God blinks a god dies. Every time a god blinks a human dies. This idea of relativity between humans, gods and God is captured in the following narrative. It shows that only God can expand and contract time and space.

Shiva represents the hermit’s way of life;Vishnu represents the householder’s way of life. In the worship of Shiva and Vishnu, Hindu society was able to resolve its own conflict: to celebrate worldly life or renounce its fettering enchantments.

Brahma creates,Vishnu sustains, Shiva destroys, while Saraswati, Lakshmi and Shakti embody knowledge, wealth and power respectively.

Brahma creates,Vishnu sustains, Shiva destroys, while Saraswati, Lakshmi and Shakti embody knowledge, wealth and power respectively. The male forms of the divine are associated with verbs—creating, sustaining and destroying—while the female forms of the divine are associated with nouns: knowledge, wealth, power. Gods do; Goddesses are. Gods are active; Goddesses passive. Goddesses may be knowledge, wealth and power but it is Gods who are knowledgeable, wealthy and powerful. Thus the male form of divinity represents the subject—he who is sensitive to life and he who responds to life. The female form of divinity represents the object—she who is life.

The split portion of the Purusha is identified as Prakriti. The two complement each other. In common parlance, Purusha is translated to mean ‘man’ while Prakriti means ‘nature’. Thus Purusha can also mean ‘culture’ while Prakriti can also mean ‘woman’. These translations suggest that in the Hindu world man is equal to culture and woman to nature. Such an interpretation reinforces the popular belief that the Hindu world is patriarchal, with men deciding how the world should be.

Rishis realized that just as Purusha could not be explained without comparing and contrasting it with Prakriti, the northern direction could not be explained without referring to the southern direction, the right side could not be explained without the left side and man could not be explained without woman. Following this realization, the north, the right side and all things masculine came to represent Purusha while the south, the left side and all things feminine came to represent Prakriti.

Spurred by the ego, Brahma seeks to possess the Goddess, control her. She takes many forms, as is her nature, and slips away like water from a clenched palm. To keep up with her, Brahma changes his forms. When she becomes a goose, he becomes a gander. When she becomes a cow, he becomes a bull. In effect, Brahma loses his own identity and acquires an identity that depends on the outside world.

Spurred by the ego, Brahma seeks to possess the Goddess, control her. She takes many forms, as is her nature, and slips away like water from a clenched palm. To keep up with her, Brahma changes his forms. When she becomes a goose, he becomes a gander. When she becomes a cow, he becomes a bull. In effect, Brahma loses his own identity and acquires an identity that depends on the outside world. As the chase proceeds, Brahma forgets the reason he created the world in the first place. The objective of self-realization gives way to the quest for self-preservation, self-propagation and self-actualization.

Had Dasharatha not been cursed, had Kaikeyi not misused her boons, Rama would never have gone into the forest and Ravana would never have been killed. The effects of curses and boons telescope into each other, weaving the plots of a narrative.

Unlike Brahma, who treats the Asuras and the Devas equally, Vishnu clearly sides with the Devas. This favouritism ensures that the wealth that emerges from the ocean of milk stays above the earth, enriching human society. Vishnu is thus a worldly form of God, patron of culture, the lord of Lakshmi.

Rama behaves like Ravana here. He distracts Vali with Sugriva’s challenge just as Ravana distracted him with the golden deer. He kills Vali through an act of trickery that is acceptable in the jungle but not in civilized society. In other words, Rama uses the law of the jungle against the very people who follow it. Vali accuses Rama of being a cheat but Rama refuses to feel guilty: those who live by the law of the jungle must be ready to die by the law of the jungle.

Life begins with a naming ceremony, followed by the rituals of shaving the hair, piercing the ear, giving the child solid food, teaching the child to read and write, getting the child educated, then married. Marriage is followed by the birth of the next generation. When the new generation comes, the old generation dies. Funeral rites involve the promise to produce children, for through children the forefathers are reborn. This predictability is the hallmark of the perfect society. Rama’s kingdom was said to be such a kingdom. The rains always came on time. There were no diseases or accidents. No surprises.

‘If I have thought of no man but Rama as my husband, let the earth split and consume me.’.

Without Sita, Rama could not bear to live on earth. He entered the river Sarayu and did not rise again.

Civilized behaviour, however cruel it may be. Rama suffers greatly because he has to choose between the dharma of a king and the dharma of a husband. As king, he must respect his people’s wishes. As husband, he can never be unfaithful to his wife. In the struggle to balance the two roles, Rama’s personal life takes a toll. Rama’s poise and dignity in the face of such pressure and tragedy make him, in the eyes of Hindus, the supreme upholder of social values, maryada purushottam.

Knowledge is a faithful wife. Saraswati is difficult to acquire, but once she comes into a person’s life she never leaves. Wealth, on the other hand, is a demanding wife. Lakshmi comes and goes as she pleases and one must constantly strive to keep her coming. Knowledge does not outlive death. Wealth does.

Knowledge is a faithful wife. Saraswati is difficult to acquire, but once she comes into a person’s life she never leaves. Wealth, on the other hand, is a demanding wife. Lakshmi comes and goes as she pleases and one must constantly strive to keep her coming. Knowledge does not outlive death. Wealth does. Distribution of knowledge only enhances it. Distribution of wealth depletes it. The difference between Saraswati and Lakshmi is apparent in their respective symbols.

Lakshmi has two forms: Bhoodevi and Shridevi. The former is the goddess of earth, the latter the goddess of heaven. The former is associated with fertility, the latter with glory and power. The former bestows tangible wealth in the form of gold and grain. The latter bestows intangible wealth: power, fame and.

Krishna is witness to a crisis between model social codes and unreasonable aspirations of the people. Krishna acknowledges, suffers and resolves this conflict between head and heart with compassion and love. Surrounded by social turbulence, he remains calm and composed, with an endearing look in his eyes and a smile on his lips. This makes him poorna-avatar, the complete and most perfect incarnation of God.

A comparison of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata shows that, though both seek to establish order in the world, they are clearly responses to different needs. The Ramayana is about compliance; the Mahabharata is about revolution. Rama strives to keep old rules; Krishna struggles to make new rules. Rama’s approach, unfortunately, allows for the exile of Sita. Krishna’s approach is marked by a furious bloodbath, where all rules of civilized warfare are disregarded.

A comparison of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata shows that, though both seek to establish order in the world, they are clearly responses to different needs. The Ramayana is about compliance; the Mahabharata is about revolution. Rama strives to keep old rules; Krishna struggles to make new rules. Rama’s approach, unfortunately, allows for the exile of Sita. Krishna’s approach is marked by a furious bloodbath, where all rules of civilized warfare are disregarded. What is dharma for Rama can never be dharma for Krishna because Rama and Krishna belong to different points in time. Rama resides in an earlier, purer age and Krishna in a later, darker age. As the Manu Smriti states, rules and regulations need to change with time and space; they need to respond to history and adapt to geography.

Daksha gave twenty-seven of his daughters in marriage to Chandra, the moon-god, who was renowned for his beauty and virility. Chandra preferred the beautiful Rohini to the others. The neglected wives complained to Daksha, who threatened Chandra with dire consequences if he did not treat all his wives with equal affection, as is expected of any polygamous man. Chandra disregarded Daksha’s threat. So he was cursed with a degenerative disease. As the days passed, he lost his potency, and began to wane. A terrified Chandra went to Shiva, who let Chandra sit on his head. There, Chandra found the power to regenerate himself: his potency returned and he began to wax. A sobered Chandra decided to devote at least one night to each of his twenty-seven wives. And so it is that the moon waxes on the days he approaches Rohini and wanes on the days he moves farther from her.

Daksha gave twenty-seven of his daughters in marriage to Chandra, the moon-god, who was renowned for his beauty and virility. Chandra preferred the beautiful Rohini to the others. The neglected wives complained to Daksha, who threatened Chandra with dire consequences if he did not treat all his wives with equal affection, as is expected of any polygamous man. Chandra disregarded Daksha’s threat. So he was cursed with a degenerative disease. As the days passed, he lost his potency, and began to wane. A terrified Chandra went to Shiva, who let Chandra sit on his head. There, Chandra found the power to regenerate himself: his potency returned and he began to wax. A sobered Chandra decided to devote at least one night to each of his twenty-seven wives. And so it is that the moon waxes on the days he approaches Rohini and wanes on the days he moves farther from her. On the new moon night he has no wife by his side. On the day before, when he is just a crescent, the moon celebrates Shiva-ratri, the night of Shiva, and takes refuge on Shiva’s locks, safe in the knowledge that he will wax once more. (Somanath Sthala Purana).

Where he is worshipped, he has two wives. In shrines, Ganesha is always associated with Lakshmi and Saraswati. Some say these are his sisters. Some say these are his wives, forms of Riddhi and Siddhi. Once again, it is association with Goddesses that makes.

Perhaps our world is the mirror of our soul. It is the source and destination of all our memories, our desires, our ideas, our feelings, our thoughts, our values and our judgements. It exists because we are aware of it. We know we exist because we are aware of it. Our world cannot exist without us. We cannot exist without our world. Without either there is neither. We are inextricably bound to each other. Our life is a life-long affair with our world that will end when we die. All meaning that we seek has to lie somewhere beween us and our world. There is no one else between the two of us.

Inside are Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, creating, sustaining and destroying. Outside are Saraswati, Lakshmi and Shakti, enlightening, enriching and empowering. Around us are the goddesses. Within are the gods.


