

To simulate the exploitation of a real reservoir without the costs of real life trial and error, e.g. to test different productions scenarios to find an optimal one before the reservoir is actually put on production.

Generality of all eight corners being handled individually is actually required (.

Some corners to be coinciding, in which case we say that the cell is degenerate. A degenerate cell has fewer actual corners than the eight corners it is defined by.Typically, a degenerate cell will have one or more edge thicknesses equal to zero, e.g. a wedge-shaped cell used to define a pinchout zone.

RESV is a special target. In principle it refers to a fluid rate measured at reservoir conditions. If we e.g. want injection to balance production such that liquid out = liquid in, we cannot do this by setting injected water equal to produced liquid, since the equality ceases to be valid when the fluids are moved to reservoir conditions. But the flag RESV tries to come around this problem.Unfortunately, the calculation of equivalent reservoir fluid volumes are based on average reservoir pressure, not the pressure of the actually produced fluid. So the RESV fluid volumes are only approximately correct. When the fluid flows from the reservoir to the surface in the well, the fluid pressure will decrease as the fluid moves upwards. The pressure drop is proportional to the completion depth, and more or less equal to hydrostatic pressure.Obviously, if the fluid leaves the reservoir at a pressure which is lower than the pressure drop it experiences on the way to the surface, it has too low energy to reach the surface at all.Therefore, if fluids are to be produced without additional means of lifting, it is required that the fluid pressure is above some minimum level when they enter the well. This is the minimum required bottom hole pressure BHP. From Equation (21) we see that the BHP will be lower when the rate is increased. A BHP violation can therefore often be met by reducing rate. Constraints on THP (tubing head pressure) act just as the BHP constraints, but are more realistic. The reason for this is that THP is the pressure measured at the tubing head, i.e. at the surface end of the well. THP is hence an accessible measure, while BHP, measured in the reservoir is only available when such measurements are done, which will be relatively infrequent if at all. To use THP data in the simulation we need to be able to compute THP values from BHP and vice versa. This is done by VFP curves (Vertical Flow Performance), which are curves which do the desired conversions. The VFP relations are complex, involving depths, tubing lengths and fluid saturations, and are beyond the scope of these notes. We will therefore stick to the BHP constraints48.

RESV is a special target. In principle it refers to a fluid rate measured at reservoir conditions. If we e.g. want injection to balance production such that liquid out = liquid in, we cannot do this by setting injected water equal to produced liquid, since the equality ceases to be valid when the fluids are moved to reservoir conditions. But the flag RESV tries to come around this problem.Unfortunately, the calculation of equivalent reservoir fluid volumes are based on average reservoir pressure, not the pressure of the actually produced fluid. So the RESV fluid volumes are only approximately correct.

Textual output. Contains run summaries, feedback messages, warnings, and errors. Optionally text listing of data arrays or aggregate values.2. Output aimed at visualisation of time-dependent behaviour, i.e.single-valued functions of time.3. Output aimed at keeping track of the reservoir state (data array values in all cells) at user defined times.


