

Restaurants are minefields for the socially inept, and I was nervous as always in these situations.

In fact, her breasts were probably no more than one and a half standard deviations from the mean size for her body weight and hardly a remarkable identifying feature.

Julie seemed unimpressed, and in reviewing the interaction later, I realized that Gene must have lied to her about his reason for not being present. This was presumably to protect Julie from feeling that her lecture was unimportant to Gene and to provide a justification for a less prestigious speaker being sent as a substitute. It seems hardly possible to analyze such a complex situation involving deceit and supposition of another person’s emotional response, and then prepare your own plausible lie, all while someone is waiting for you to reply to a question. Yet that is exactly what people expect you to be able to do.

“Rational detachment: is that a euphemism for lack of emotion?”.

“Imagine,” I said, “you’re hiding in a basement. The enemy is searching for you and your friends. Everyone has to keep totally quiet, but your baby is crying.” I did an impression, as Gene would, to make the story more convincing: “Waaaaa.” I paused dramatically. “You have a gun.” Hands went up everywhere. Julie jumped to her feet as I continued. “With a silencer. They’re coming closer. They’re going to kill you all. What do you do? The baby’s screaming—” The kids couldn’t wait.

The second friend was Daphne, whose friendship period also overlapped with Gene and Claudia’s. She moved into the apartment above mine after her husband entered a nursing home as a result of dementia. Due to knee failure, exacerbated by obesity, she was unable to walk more than a few steps, but she was highly intelligent and I began to visit her regularly. She had no formal qualifications, having performed a traditional female homemaker role. I considered this to be an extreme waste of talent—particularly as her descendants did not return the care. She was curious about my work, and we initiated the Teach Daphne Genetics Project, which was fascinating for both of us. She began eating her dinner in my apartment on a regular basis, as there are massive economies of scale in cooking one meal for two people rather than two separate meals. Each Sunday at 3:00 p.m. we would visit her husband at the nursing home, which was 7.3 kilometers away. I was able to combine a 14.6-kilometer walk pushing a wheelchair with interesting conversation about genetics. I would read while she spoke to her husband, whose level of comprehension was difficult to determine but definitely low. Daphne had been named after the plant that was flowering at the time of her birth, on the twenty-eighth of August. On each birthday, her husband would give her daphne flowers, and she considered this a highly romantic action. She complained that her approaching birthday would be the first occasion in fifty-six years on which this symbolic act would not be performed. The solution was obvious, and when I wheeled her to my apartment for dinner on her seventy-eighth birthday, I had purchased a quantity of the flowers to give her. She recognized the smell immediately and began crying. I thought I had made a terrible error, but she explained that her tears were a symptom of happiness. She was also impressed by the chocolate cake that I had made, but not to the same extent. During the meal, she made an incredible statement: “Don, you would make someone a wonderful husband.” This was so contrary to my experiences of being rejected by women that I was temporarily stunned. Then I presented her with the facts—the history of my attempts to find a partner, beginning with my assumption as a child that I would grow up and get married, and finishing with my abandonment of the idea as the evidence grew that I was unsuitable. Her argument was simple: there’s someone for everyone. Statistically, she was almost certainly correct. Unfortunately, the probability that I would find such a person was vanishingly small. But it created a disturbance in my brain, like a mathematical problem that we know must have a solution. For her next two birthdays, we repeated the flower ritual. The results were not as dramatic as the first time, but I also purchased gifts for her—books on genetics—and she seemed very happy. She told me that her birthday had always been her favorite day of the year. I understood that this view was common in children, owing to the gifts, but had not expected it in an adult. Ninety-three days after the third birthday dinner, we were traveling to the nursing home, discussing a genetics paper that Daphne had read the previous day, when it became apparent that she had forgotten some significant points. It was not the first time in recent weeks that her memory had been faulty, and I immediately organized an assessment of her cognitive functioning. The diagnosis was Alzheimer’s disease. Daphne’s intellectual capability deteriorated rapidly, and we were soon unable to have our discussions about genetics. But we continued our meals and walks to the nursing home. Daphne now spoke primarily about her past, focusing on her husband and family, and I was able to form a generalized view of what married life could be like. She continued to insist that I could find a compatible partner and enjoy the high level of happiness that she had experienced in her own life. Supplementary research confirmed that Daphne’s arguments were supported by evidence: married men are happier and live longer. One day Daphne asked, “When will it be my birthday again?” and I realized that she had lost track of dates. I decided that it would be acceptable to lie in order to maximize her happiness. The problem was to source some daphne out of season, but I had unexpected success. I was aware of a geneticist who was working on altering and extending the flowering of plants for commercial reasons. He was able to supply my flower vendor with some daphne, and we had a simulated birthday dinner. I repeated the procedure each time Daphne asked about her birthday. Eventually, it was necessary for Daphne to join her husband at the nursing home, and as her memory failed, we celebrated her birthdays more often, until I was visiting her daily. The flower vendor gave me a special loyalty card. I calculated that Daphne had reached the age of 207, according to the number of birthdays, when she stopped recognizing me, and 319 when she no longer responded to the daphne and I abandoned the visits.

Most male animals are programmed to give higher priority to sex than to assisting an unrelated individual, and Gene had the additional motivation of his research project. Arguing would be hopeless.

The underlying problem was the preoccupation with image.

Many women had included photos, but I had suppressed them in the database display to allow space for more important data.

I pointed out that I was collecting data to support life’s most critical decision.

“How about we do dinner tonight?” I repeated. “See, that wasn’t so hard. Make only positive comments about their appearance. Pay for the meal. Do not mention sex.” Gene walked to the door, then turned back. “What about the paper ones?” I gave him my questionnaires from Table for Eight, the singles party, and, at his insistence, even the partially completed ones from the speed dating. Now it was out of my hands.

I have heard the word stunning used to describe women, but this was the first time I had actually been stunned by one.

“No assistance is required,” I said. “I recommend reading a book.” I watched Rosie walk to the bookshelf, briefly peruse the contents, then walk away. Perhaps she used IBM rather than Apple software, although many of the manuals applied to both.

The sound system has an iPod port that I use to play podcasts while I cook. Rosie plugged in her phone, and music emanated from the speakers. It was not loud, but I was certain that if I had put on a podcast without asking permission when visiting someone’s house, I would have been accused of a social error.

Very certain, as I had made this exact mistake at a dinner party four years and sixty-seven days ago.

Vegetarians and vegans can be incredibly annoying. Gene has a joke: “How can you tell if someone is a vegan? Just wait ten minutes and they’ll tell you.” If this were so, it would not be so much of a problem. No! Vegetarians arrive for dinner and then say, “I don’t eat meat.” This was the second time. The Pig’s Trotter Disaster had happened six years ago, when Gene suggested that I invite a woman to dinner at my apartment. He argued that my cooking expertise would make me more desirable and I would not have to deal with the pressure of a restaurant environment. “And you can drink as much as you like and stagger to the bedroom.”.

“So, you cook this same meal every Tuesday, right?” “Correct.” I listed the eight major advantages of the Standardized Meal System. 1. No need to accumulate recipe books. 2. Standard shopping list—hence very efficient shopping. 3. Almost zero waste—nothing in the refrigerator or pantry unless required for one of the recipes. 4. Diet planned and nutritionally balanced in advance. 5. No time wasted wondering what to cook. 6. No mistakes, no unpleasant surprises. 7. Excellent food, superior to most restaurants at a much lower price (see point 3). 8. Minimal cognitive load required. “Cognitive load?” “The cooking procedures are in my cerebellum—virtually no conscious effort is required.” “Like riding a bike.” “Correct.” “You can make lobster whatever without thinking?” “Lobster, mango, and avocado salad with wasabi-coated flying fish roe and crispy seaweed and deep-fried leek garnish. Correct. My current project is quail boning. It still requires conscious effort.”.

Rosie interrupted again. “If you were on your usual schedule, what time would it be now?” “Six thirty-eight p.m.” The clock on the oven showed 9:09 p.m. Rosie located the controls and started adjusting the time. I realized what she was doing. A perfect solution. When she was finished, it showed 6:38 p.m. No recalculations required. I congratulated her on her thinking. “You’ve created a new time zone. Dinner will be ready at eight fifty-five p.m.—Rosie time.”.

I had another unexpected moment of feeling good as I continued recalculating times. Rosie interrupted again. “If you were on your usual schedule, what time would it be now?” “Six thirty-eight p.m.” The clock on the oven showed 9:09 p.m. Rosie located the controls and started adjusting the time. I realized what she was doing. A perfect solution. When she was finished, it showed 6:38 p.m. No recalculations required. I congratulated her on her thinking. “You’ve created a new time zone. Dinner will be ready at eight fifty-five p.m.—Rosie time.”.

I had another unexpected moment of feeling good as I continued recalculating times. Rosie interrupted again. “If you were on your usual schedule, what time would it be now?” “Six thirty-eight p.m.” The clock on the oven showed 9:09 p.m. Rosie located the controls and started adjusting the time. I realized what she was doing. A perfect solution. When she was finished, it showed 6:38 p.m. No recalculations required. I congratulated her on her thinking. “You’ve created a new time zone. Dinner will be ready at eight fifty-five p.m.—Rosie time.” “Beats doing the math,” she said. Her observation gave me an opportunity for another Wife Project question. “Do you find mathematics difficult?”.

I had another unexpected moment of feeling good as I continued recalculating times. Rosie interrupted again. “If you were on your usual schedule, what time would it be now?” “Six thirty-eight p.m.” The clock on the oven showed 9:09 p.m. Rosie located the controls and started adjusting the time. I realized what she was doing. A perfect solution. When she was finished, it showed 6:38 p.m. No recalculations required. I congratulated her on her thinking. “You’ve created a new time zone. Dinner will be ready at eight fifty-five p.m.—Rosie time.” “Beats doing the math,” she said. Her observation gave me an opportunity for another Wife Project question. “Do you find mathematics difficult?” She laughed. “It’s only the single hardest part of what I do. Drives me nuts.” If the simple arithmetic of bar and restaurant bills was beyond her, it was hard to imagine how we could have meaningful discussions. “Where do you hide the corkscrew?” she asked. “Wine is not scheduled for Tuesdays.” “Fuck that,” said Rosie. There was a certain logic underlying Rosie’s response. I would only be eating a single serving of dinner. It was the final step in the abandonment of the evening’s schedule. I announced the change. “Time has been redefined. Previous rules no longer apply. Alcohol is hereby declared mandatory in the Rosie Time Zone.”.

Females seek maximum-quality genes for their children plus a male to support them.”.

An obvious thought occurred to me, obvious because I am a geneticist. “Your hair is a very unusual color. Possibly—” She laughed. “There aren’t any genes for this shade of red.” She must have seen that I was confused. “This color only comes out of a bottle.” I realized what she was saying. She had deliberately dyed her hair an unnaturally bright color. Incredible. It hadn’t even occurred to me to include hair dyeing on the questionnaire. I made a mental note to do so.

“Well,” she said, “it’s been an evening. Have a good life.”.

“People with long earlobes are more likely to choose partners with long earlobes. It’s a better predictor than IQ.”.

If she knew how many friends I had, she might have realized what a great compliment she had paid me.

Why do we focus on certain things at the expense of others? We will risk our lives to save a person from drowning, yet not make a donation that could save dozens of children from starvation.

Why do we focus on certain things at the expense of others? We will risk our lives to save a person from drowning, yet not make a donation that could save dozens of children from starvation. We install solar panels when their impact on CO2 emissions is minimal—and indeed may have a net negative effect if manufacturing and installation are taken into account—rather than contributing to more efficient infrastructure projects. I consider my own decision making in these areas to be more rational than that of most people, but I also make errors of the same kind. We are genetically programmed to react to stimuli in our immediate vicinity. Responding to complex issues that we cannot perceive directly requires the application of reasoning, which is less powerful than instinct.

Why do we focus on certain things at the expense of others? We will risk our lives to save a person from drowning, yet not make a donation that could save dozens of children from starvation. We install solar panels when their impact on CO2 emissions is minimal—and indeed may have a net negative effect if manufacturing and installation are taken into account—rather than contributing to more efficient infrastructure projects. I consider my own decision making in these areas to be more rational than that of most people, but I also make errors of the same kind. We are genetically programmed to react to stimuli in our immediate vicinity. Responding to complex issues that we cannot perceive directly requires the application of reasoning, which is less powerful than instinct. This seemed to be the most likely explanation for my continued interest in the Father Project. Rationally, there were more important uses for my research capabilities, but instinctively I was driven to assist Rosie with her more immediate problem.

As I finished lunch.

It was interesting that Rosie also found conversation with a parent difficult. My mother is a good person but very focused on sharing personal information. Rosie picked up a slice of pizza and looked at the computer screen.

“I have never heard of the Wife Project. But I’m about to. In detail.” “Of course,” I said. “But we should time-share it with pizza consumption and beer drinking.”.

“How nice for them. Here’s a thought for you. Any woman who takes that test is willing to be treated as an object. You can say that’s their choice. But if you spent two minutes looking at how much society forces women to think of themselves as objects, you might not think so. What I want to know is, do you want a woman who thinks like that? Is that the sort of wife you want?” Rosie was sounding angry. “You know why I dress the way I do? Why these glasses? Because I don’t want to be treated as an object. If you knew how insulted I am that you think I was an applicant, a candidate—”.

Interested.” “Since when do women discuss anything explicitly?”.

“Since when do women discuss anything explicitly?” said Gene.

“Rosie and I discussed the question of a relationship explicitly. Neither of us is interested.” “Since when do women discuss anything explicitly?” said Gene.

If she doesn’t want you for yourself, then she’s not the right person for you.”.

“What about Daphne?” asked Claudia. It was true: Daphne was unlike the women I had dated. This was excellent therapy—refutation by counterexample. Perhaps Bianca would be a younger, dancing version of Daphne.

It is virtually impossible to make useful comparisons of levels of happiness, especially across long periods of time. But if I had been asked to choose the happiest day of my life, I would previously have nominated, without hesitation, the first day I spent at the American Museum of Natural History in New York when I traveled there for a conference during my PhD studies. The second-best day was the second day there, and the third-best the third day there. But after recent events, the answer was not so clear. It was difficult to choose between the Natural History Museum and the night of cocktail making at the golf club. Should I therefore consider resigning my job and accepting Amghad’s offer of a partnership in a cocktail bar? Would I be permanently happier? The idea seemed ludicrous. The cause of.

It is virtually impossible to make useful comparisons of levels of happiness, especially across long periods of time. But if I had been asked to choose the happiest day of my life, I would previously have nominated, without hesitation, the first day I spent at the American Museum of Natural History in New York when I traveled there for a conference during my PhD studies. The second-best day was the second day there, and the third-best the third day there. But after recent events, the answer was not so clear. It was difficult to choose between the Natural History Museum and the night of cocktail making at the golf club. Should I therefore consider resigning my job and accepting Amghad’s offer of a partnership in a cocktail bar? Would I be permanently happier? The idea seemed ludicrous.

She died two years ago because of medical incompetence.”.

I know you don’t need my money, and my children do, but I have left you a small sum. I would be pleased if you would use it for something irrational.

On the way to the airport, I had asked Claudia for advice on dealing with so much time in the company of one person. “Remember to listen,” said Claudia. “If she asks you an awkward question, ask her why she’s asking. Turn it back to her. If she’s a psychology student, she’ll love talking about herself. Take notice of your emotions as well as logic. Emotions have their own logic. And try to go with the flow.”.

Gene frequently states that psychologists are incompetent at understanding themselves.

“It would be unreasonable to give you credit for being incredibly beautiful.”.

Amazing. She retains a professor of genetics, an alien of extraordinary abilities, to help find her father, she travels for a week, spending almost every minute of the waking day with him, yet when she wants the answer to a question on genetics, she goes to the Internet.

Claudia also suggested I watch As Good as It Gets, “just for fun.” Although her advice was to use it as an example of what not to do, I was impressed that the Jack Nicholson character handled a jacket problem with more finesse than I had. It was also encouraging that, despite serious social incompetence, a significant difference in age between him and the Helen Hunt character, probable multiple psychiatric disorders, and a level of intolerance far more severe than mine, he succeeded in winning the love of the woman in the end. An excellent choice by Claudia.

“If you really love someone,” Claudia continued, “you have to be prepared to accept them as they are. Maybe you hope that one day they get a wake-up call and make the changes for their own reasons.”.

I wished I had not learned to read expressions, because I could read Rosie’s now and I knew the answer.


