

Die Mannschaft — as the national squad is called — for almost a decade, as his 23 goals and 40 assists from 92 appearances attest. But when he released an explosive statement, with a declaration that he could no longer wear the German shirt with “pride and excitement”.

Özil’s burden July 25, 2018 00:00 IST Updated: July 25, 2018 03:36 IST The German footballer has been tragically bruised by the politics-sport interface Mesut Özil’s withdrawal from the German football team on Sunday came as a shock to many. One of the most gifted midfielders of his generation, Özil has been a mainstay of the Die Mannschaft — as the national squad is called — for almost a decade, as his 23 goals and 40 assists from 92 appearances attest. But when he released an explosive statement, with a declaration that he could no longer wear the German shirt with “pride and excitement” because of “racism and disrespect”, it caused many a football fan to shudder. The turn of events has its roots in Özil and fellow footballer İlkay Gündoğan meeting Turkish President Recep Erdoğan in London and presenting him with shirts just before the World Cup. Both Özil and Gündoğan are Germany-born players of Turkish origin and their act was perceived as an endorsement of the Turkish leader, who is widely derided for leading his country down the path of autocracy with rampant human rights violations. Germany’s surprise first-round exit from the 2018 World Cup in Russia produced a convenient brickbat to target Özil with, and it was compounded by the vitriol directed at him. From DFB (German Football Association) president Reinhard Grindel to the legendary skipper Lothar Matthäus to sections of the media, the Arsenal playmaker spared no one as he alleged they had “disrespected his Turkish roots” and “selfishly turned [him] into political propaganda.” The episode has unravelled at a time when Germany is at a crossroads — over whether to move forward and forge a more cosmopolitan, open society or retreat into its nationalistic past. Özil, apart from his immigrant background, is a practising Muslim, and when Germany won the 2014 World Cup he was the poster boy of the DFB’s efforts to make football inclusive. That one international failure — which could be explained purely in footballing terms — can lead to such a vile debate clearly indicates the fault lines. “I am German when we win, but an immigrant when we lose,” lamented the 29-year-old. To have his loyalty questioned even after he gave up his Turkish passport in order to play for Germany must have been distressing. However, Özil has unwittingly walked into an unnecessary controversy over a sensitive issue. Meeting President Erdoğan may have been “about respecting the highest office of his family’s country”, but he should have been mindful of the fact that Germany and Turkey shared a tenuous relationship, with the Turkish President having accused Angela Merkel’s government of being stuck in Germany’s Nazi past. And when a minister in the Turkish Cabinet termed Özil’s move to quit as the “most beautiful goal against the virus of fascism”, it hit Germany where it hurt the most. When Özil said he had “two hearts, one German, one Turkish,” he was attempting a delicate balancing act, favouring integration — a cherished modern-day value — over assimilation. Little did he expect that it would be so rough a ride..

He said that the Constitution should be torn up on two grounds: first, that it is based on Western ideas written by Anglophile lawyers and is in the wrong language. That happens to be true, we can do nothing about it. The second and more far-reaching objection was that the Constitution rests on a false premise. He says it has the wrong idea of what a nation is. The Constitution assumes [that a] nation called India is a territory called India and all the people living in it. Wrong, he says, a nation is not territory but its people. The people of India are the Hindu people and the Constitution should have been written for the Hindu people and the Hindu Rashtra.

He said that the Constitution should be torn up on two grounds: first, that it is based on Western ideas written by Anglophile lawyers and is in the wrong language. That happens to be true, we can do nothing about it. The second and more far-reaching objection was that the Constitution rests on a false premise. He says it has the wrong idea of what a nation is. The Constitution assumes [that a] nation called India is a territory called India and all the people living in it. Wrong, he says, a nation is not territory but its people. The people of India are the Hindu people and the Constitution should have been written for the Hindu people and the Hindu Rashtra. That idea is fundamentally troubling. Because it means that anybody who is not a Hindu or is not willing to identify himself as a Hindu is either a guest or an interloper.

One said that religion should be the determinant of nationhood.

The other said that we are fighting for the rights of everybody and that was the idea of India.

Now, India still reflects this idea. Pakistan reflects their idea in the worst form. Why would these people advocate an idea which is a mirror image of Pakistan? That was my point. My point was not that Hindus are in any way like Pakistan; it was a rejection of Pakistan and an assertion of the idea that a majority of Indian Hindus will not be in that Pakistan.

The Prime Minister says the Constitution is his holy book and Deen Dayal Upadhyay is his ideologue. The two ideas are incompatible.

The BJP is competing for the Hindutva votes. Hinduism is not Hindutva. Hinduism is a religious identity of 80% of our population and Hindutva is a political ideology of, I dare say, 20% of our population.

So I would say we are secular in the sense that we want the state to be distant from religion, we don’t want a Hindu Rashtra.

So I would say we are secular in the sense that we want the state to be distant from religion, we don’t want a Hindu Rashtra. But that does not mean we have no personal religion ourselves. There are very many Hindus in the Congress. Their Hinduism is a Hinduism of acceptance, coexistence. Such Hindus will be ashamed of people lynching an innocent man on the grounds of his religion, of a cap on his head, of the meat he is carrying, or that he is herding cows.

The Congress is secular in the sense that we want the state to be distant from religion, we don’t want a Hindu Rashtra. That does not mean we have no personal religion ourselves.

Over 34% of India’s current population lives in urban areas, rising by 3% since 2011.

An important conundrum is whether the Congress can emerge as a meaningful alternative to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its Hindu majoritarian politics. On the evidence of its campaign so far, especially in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the party appears to have chosen the path of least resistance. Given that these two States also happen to.

The party of Hinduism? G. Sampath   G. Sampath November 08, 2018 00:00 IST Updated: November 08, 2018 03:36 IST Liberals hoping that Rahul Gandhi’s Congress would rescue them from Hindutva may be in for a rude awakening The stage is all set for Assembly elections in five States — Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and Telangana. Described as a ‘semi-final’ for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, they offer a foretaste of the electoral strategies likely to be on view next year. Though State and national elections often have their own specific dynamic, some useful inferences may be drawn from the campaigns of the national parties, especially the Congress. An important conundrum is whether the Congress can emerge as a meaningful alternative to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its Hindu majoritarian politics. On the evidence of its campaign so far, especially in Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan, the party appears to have chosen the path of least resistance. Given that these two States also happen to be among those where the BJP’s Hindutva dimension is in full bloom, they presented the Congress with a good opportunity to test its political counter to the divisive agenda of its adversary. The combination of high anti-incumbency and a two-way contest with the BJP meant that the Congress could have taken the ideological battle to the Sangh Parivar. Wooing the upper castes But the Congress did nothing of the sort. It steered clear of the BJP’s majoritarian depredations, and opted to woo the same upper castes that constitute the BJP’s core vote base. It has embraced what has come to be known as ‘soft Hindutva’. In Madhya Pradesh, for instance, the Congress has promised to build cow shelters in every village if voted to power — this in a State where desperate farmers were fired upon by the administration. In Kerala, its State unit has played along with so-called religious sentiment, opposing the entry of women (between the ages of 10-50) in Sabarimala instead of standing by the constitutional principle of equality. In Rajasthan, too, the Congress’s game plan is to retrieve the upper caste vote from the BJP. Hindutva politics has queered the pitch in such a way that today no party can specifically woo the savarna voter without pandering to communal sentiment. In effect, this means not confronting the infusion of religion into the heart of democratic politics. Conversely, challenging it would require two things from a party: certain ideological non-negotiables, among which, in the case of the Congress, would be the Nehruvian legacy of secularism and a politics of caste rooted in the principle of social justice. Given the cynicism that has become commonplace in public discourse, it is fashionable to scoff at any expectation of principles in politics. But it is delusional to imagine that the very realpolitik that unleashed the genie of communal hatred on national politics will also be able — now that its disruptions are coming home to roost — to put that genie back into the constitutional bottle. In fact, the most troubling takeaway from the Congress’s approach to these Assembly polls is that even an outright victory for a Congress-led alliance in 2019, however improbable it may seem at present, may not really signify a defeat of communal forces. The clearest indication yet that the Congress cannot be expected to counter the normalisation of Hindu majoritarianism came during party president Rahul Gandhi’s campaign tour in Madhya Pradesh, where he stated that the “Congress was a party of Hinduism”. He prefaced it by saying that it was “not a party of Hindutva” but the fact that he felt compelled to paint the Congress in Hindu colours marks a clear shift in the party’s overt political line. For some time now, there has been a debate on the Congress’s use of ‘soft Hindutva’ as a counter to the BJP’s presumably ‘hard’ Hindutva. Mr. Gandhi’s supporters have argued that what has been labelled as ‘soft Hindutva’ is nothing but a free and open expression of his personal faith as a devout Hindu. Even if this were true, his temple visits, which rarely seem to take place without a photo-op, the recent emergence of vermilion on his forehead, his pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar, and his coming out as a Shiv bhakt, are all gestures saturated with political significance. Smart politics? They could either be read as a smart political response to the widespread ‘Hinduisation’ of the socio-political sphere, or as an admission of defeat to Hindutva forces, for this is exactly what they seek — an India where Hindu identity would be the starting point of any mobilisation for political power. Last month, a Rajasthan Minister was booked for violating the Representation of the People Act after he gave a speech asking all Hindus to vote for the BJP. Mr. Gandhi has never verbalised such a plea with regard to his own party. But can we truly characterise his description of the Congress as a “party of Hinduism”, or his embodiment of Hindu symbolism on the campaign trail, as actions in keeping with either the spirit of the Representation of the People Act or the secularism the Constitution speaks of? There are other aspects of this symbolism-driven ‘soft Hindutva’ that are as troubling: an overriding anxiety not to be seen as sympathetic to Muslims; and a low key yet consistent messaging that underscores Mr. Gandhi’s position at the apex of the caste hierarchy as a “ janeu -wearing Hindu”. The phrase, used by a Congress spokesperson after Mr. Gandhi’s visit to the Somnath temple last year, was invoked by a BJP leader recently in the context of yet another temple visit by Mr. Gandhi, when he asked, “What kind of janeu-dhari are you? What is your gotra ?” The focus on Mr. Gandhi’s caste pedigree once again reveals how temple politics is never without its attendant caste politics. Put simply, it gives the lie to Mr. Gandhi’s self-serving distinction between Hindutva and Hinduism, a distinction that is also becoming increasingly popular among an influential section of Indian liberals who, much like Mr. Gandhi, seem to have suddenly woken up to their Hindu identity in the last four years. For these ‘proud Hindus’, one of whom has recently penned a bestselling book on why he is one, the classical secularist position that one’s religion is a private matter and not an instrument to garner social or political capital is, of course, past its sell-by date. The distinction between Hinduism and Hindutva — which only matters because of the political uses of religion —rests on two premises. First, that Hinduism is inclusive and progressive, while Hindutva is exclusionary and regressive; second, that Hinduism is individualistic and preaches tolerance, whereas Hindutva is a supremacist ideology that deploys angry mobs to subjugate other religious communities. On Sangh Parivar’s page While this is, no doubt, an interesting distinction, it is even more interesting that no Hindutva ideologue has ever expressed any discomfort with this definition of Hinduism that categorically rejects Hindutva. If anything, representatives of the Sangh Parivar have been pleased with the transformation of the Congress president into a tilak-wearing, temple-hopping ‘Hindu politician’. The Congress becoming more ‘Hindu’ is but another sign of savarna consolidation, a movement of which Hindutva is the flag-bearer. Mr. Gandhi’s version of non-threatening Hinduism and the Parivar’s aggressive Hindutva are in complete agreement on one issue: caste. They both want to be the party of choice for the upper castes, and so long as this remains the case, the Congress cannot be expected to operationalise in its politics the principle of equality. In other words, liberals and other good-hearted people hoping that Mr. Gandhi and the Congress would rescue them from Hindutva may be in for a rude awakening. As is well known, god doesn’t help those who don’t help themselves. sampath.g@thehindu.co.in.

Indira Gandhi was the first woman to present a Budget in 1970, when she was the Prime Minister. Her Finance Minister Morarji Desai had resigned from the Cabinet, prompting her to retain the Finance portfolio for a year.

Only a sentence of two years and above will attract disqualification under the Representation of the People Act. Sedition, or Section 124A of the IPC, is not one of the offences that entail disqualification, regardless of the length of the jail term.

“Section 124 A IPC also attracts intention or tendency to create disorder or disturbance to law and order or incitement to violence... Whether that act resulted in violence is immaterial. The charge under Section 124 A IPC stands proved.” She also imposed a Rs. 10,000 fine. After taking a look at the judgment, Mr. Vaiko objected to an observation that he had sought “lenient punishment”.

The first Budget of the second Modi government appeared to be of a continuum of the last with an emphasis on social welfare. This includes a bank overdraft facility of Rs. 5000 for women members of Self Help Groups (SHG) and an identification with the poor, while the rich (those with incomes between Rs. 2 and 5 crore and Rs. 5 crore and above) have been hit with a hike in surcharge.

The political optics of taxing the rich is quite potent and the government appears mindful of that.

There was a lot of stress on infrastructure development, including tax relief for affordable housing, with a proposed tax holiday for developers of affordable housing and an additional deduction of upto Rs. 1.5 lakh for interest on home loans borrowed upto March 31, 2020.

“We will always be the people who defeated a tyrant, crossed a continent, harnessed science, took to the skies, and soared into the heavens, because we will never forget that we are Americans, and the future belongs to us.”.

Audit report reveals irregularities within scam-hit Vyapam Testing times:The head office of the Mandhya Pradesh Professional Examination Board in Bhopal.A. M. Faruqui   Sidharth Yadav Bhopal, July 29, 2019 00:00 IST Updated: July 29, 2019 06:08 IST Recruitments were carried out during two years under false premises For at least two financial years after the Vyapam scam was uncovered in Madhya Pradesh in July 2013, administrative and financial irregularities running into crores of rupees continued unchecked within the examination board, reveals an audit report. Glaring irregularities such as unjustified recruitment of volunteers, posting of security guards hired by Vyapam at private bungalows, recruitment of officials on fake community certificates, and the use of whitener and overwriting in cash books, have come to the fore in the audit report for 2013-2014 and 2014-2015. The Directorate of Local Fund Audit of the Department of Finance in its report submitted to Vyapam in 2017 stated such irregularities “were an open invitation to fraud and embezzlement”. In almost all the instances of financial irregularities, it said “related persons/officials” had to repay the board for the funds used. The Hindu is in possession of a copy of the report. Scam rekindled The scam has been rekindled as State Home Minister Bala Bachchan recently said the government did not possess the anonymous letter received by the Indore Police on June 20, 2013, that blew the lid off the scam. The scam involved 13 different examinations conducted by the Vyapam or the Madhya Pradesh Professional Examination Board for recruitment to government jobs and admissions to educational institutions in the State. In August 2013, the Shivraj Singh Chouhan government constituted a Special Task Force to probe the scam. The Central Bureau of Investigation took over in July 2015. In the two years, while the STF was investigating the scam, several officials were recruited to the board on a false premise. “The board, a respectable organisation which recruits personnel in other Departments, itself has recruited personnel on fake SC/ST certificates, which shows the absence of vigilance within it,” says the report. ‘Against rules’ Moreover, the team noted that in 2013-2014 and 2014-2015, the board hired volunteers and daily wage workers “against the rules and in an objectionable way” and paid them Rs. 1,21,94,751 as salary. “It is unclear which work were the volunteers required for, in what numbers and of what category. It is unclear through which process they were recruited and for how long, whether there were vacancies and the work done by them monitored,” says the report. “In the absence of permission from the government to create posts for these volunteers, the payment made to these volunteers stands nullified and should be recovered from individual payers,” says the report. The report says Rs. 14,25,952 was paid to 23 volunteers in 2013-2014 and 13 in 2014-2015, although they had “not signed against their names” in the attendance records. Notes from officials The volunteers received their salaries based on notes sent by higher officials. “In the records, in some places in front of their names ‘Secretary’ or ‘honourable Minister’ was found to be written,” the report reveals. In 2013-2014, as much as Rs. 2,14,925 was paid to guards of Krishna Security, a Bhopal-based firm, from the board’s coffers, but they were posted at private houses and bungalows. ‘Neglect of duty’ Moreover, in the cash books of the financial years audited, says the report, several figures under the cash and bank columns had been changed using whitener or by overwriting, without being attested by the competent authority. The team noted that the use of whitener “could make fraud possible and thereby damage the credibility of the board”. “The scam wouldn’t have happened in the first place if there was an internal audit of confidential payments,” said State Law Minister P.C. Sharma. He said he was not aware of the audit report..

Ahead of the trust vote to be moved by Chief.


